Modify rule S5500: mention std::ranges::move and rewrite RSPEC (CPP-5219) (#3933)
SonarSource/rspec: rules/S5500/cfamily/rule.adoc

// Those functions are assumed to be less frequently needed.

* Generally, `std::move` can be used to move such arguments;
* For containers, {cpp}20 `std::ranges::move` or {cpp}23 `std::views::as_rvalue` can be used to move their elements;
* It is also possible to use a range-based for loop to move elements.

We illustrate these solutions in the examples below based on the following definitions.

[source,cpp]
----
class Shape {
public:
  Shape(Shape const& shape); // Copy constructor
  Shape(Shape&& shape);      // Move constructor
  // More code...

  bool isVisible() const;
};

class DrawingStore {
  std::vector<Shape> store;

public:
  void insertVisibleShape(Shape&& shape);
  void insertAllShapes(std::vector<Shape>&& shapes);
  void insertAllVisibleShapes(std::vector<Shape>&& shapes);
};
----

=== How to move an rvalue parameter

==== Noncompliant code example

When the parameter represents a single object you want to move, it is not sufficient to use `&&` after its type in the parameter list.

[source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
void DrawingStore::insertVisibleShape(Shape&& shape) {
  if (shape.isVisible()) {

>     store.emplace_back(shape); // Noncompliant, call to std::move is expected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    store.emplace_back(shape); // Noncompliant, calls Shape's copy constructor
```

Reviewer: In that case, what would you think of:
```
void DrawingStore::insertVisibleShape(Shape&& shape) { // Noncompliant, Shape is never moved
  if (shape.isVisible()) {
    store.emplace_back(shape); // Calls Shape's copy constructor.
  }
}
```

Which would be corrected as:
```
void DrawingStore::insertVisibleShape(Shape&& shape) { // Compliant
  if (shape.isVisible()) {
    store.emplace_back(std::move(shape)); // Calls Shape's move constructor.
  }
}
```
To me, the benefits are:
- As you mention, even if a call to std::move is expected, it could be called in other places
- I think it more clearly describes what actually happens in the code because:
   - Inline comments avoid having to refer to a place in the code in the next sentence
   - There is a symmetry in the inline comments that highlight the difference

If you still disagree, I'm not going to fight. The RSPEC is correct as it is. I just feel it could be improved.

Author: Your idea is not bad, but it would take me a bit of time to adapt and make other sections consistent.

It also has a downside: the diff highlighting will include the first line of the (non)compliant code because of the comment, but only the comment changes. Since the diff is on the whole line (and not on words), this will distract the readers a bit.

So I'll keep the current wording for now. We can always revisit this in the future.

  }
}
----

> With the above implementation, the `Shape` object appended in `store` is created using ``Shape``'s _copy_ constructor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
With the suggested modification in the comment, I think this no longer brings value.

Author: See my other comment in this review.

==== Compliant solution

To ensure the object's content is moved, you have to call `std::move()` like this:

[source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=compliant]
----
void DrawingStore::insertVisibleShape(Shape&& shape) {
  if (shape.isVisible()) {

>     store.emplace_back(std::move(shape)); // Compliant

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    store.emplace_back(std::move(shape)); // Compliant, calls Shape's move constructor
```

Author: See my other comment in this review.

  }
}
----

With this fix, the _move_ constructor of `Shape` is used and the content of the parameter `shape` can be transferred to the newly created object in `store`.

=== How to move elements of a container using for-loops

When you want to transfer the content of multiple objects into another container, it also makes sense to define the parameter as rvalue with `&&`.

==== Noncompliant code example

While the following code looks fine and compiles, it does actually _copy_ the elements. In fact, `shapes` is left unchanged.

[source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
void DrawingStore::insertAllShapes(std::vector<Shape>&& shapes) {

>   for (auto& s : shapes) {

Reviewer: Should we use `auto &&` here?

Author: The type deduction will give `Shape&` in both case. I feel `auto&` is less misleading.  `Shape&&` does not compile (rvalue reference to type 'Shape' cannot bind to lvalue of type 'Shape').

Type deduction may be confusing here, so I'll spell the type `Shape&` instead.

Author: ```suggestion
  for (Shape& s : shapes) {
```

Reviewer: My point was exactly that with `auto&&,` some people would erroneously believe that it would be deduced to `Shape&&,` and it was an opportunity to open their eyes.
However, I agree with your change of removing deduction.

    if (s.isVisible()) {
      store.emplace_back(s); // Noncompliant, call to std::move is expected.
    }
  }
}
----

==== Compliant solution

As in the previous example, a call to `std::move` is required to fix the implementation:

[source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=compliant]
----
void DrawingStore::insertAllVisibleShapes(std::vector<Shape>&& shapes) {

>   for (auto& s : shapes) {

Author: ```suggestion
  for (Shape& s : shapes) {
```

    if (s.isVisible()) {
      store.emplace_back(std::move(s)); // Compliant
    }
  }
}
----

> // We purposely do not go into the details of "move-from" states and the fact that `shapes` has still the same number of elements while some of them are in this "moved-from" state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// We purposely do not go into the details of "moved-from" states and the fact that `shapes` has still the same number of elements while some of them are in this "moved-from" state.
```

> Notice that in this solution, the for-loop variable `s` remains an lvalue reference with a single `&`.

Reviewer: Adjust this if the previous loop is rewritten with `auto&&`

Author: Ditto, I'm now using `Shape&` everywhere.

> Furthermore, writing ``++for (auto& s : std::move(shapes))++`` would not fix the issue because this call to `std::move` has no effect here.

Author: ```suggestion
Furthermore, writing ``++for (Shape& s : std::move(shapes))++`` would not fix the issue because this call to `std::move` has no effect here.
```

> Notice that in this solution, the for-loop variable `s` remains an lvalue reference with a single `&`.
> Furthermore, writing ``++for (Shape& s : std::move(shapes))++`` would not fix the issue because this call to `std::move` has no effect here.
> The call to `std::move` has to be on `s`, not `shapes`.
> 
> Thankfully, {cpp}23 offers a new feature that makes the code more regular: with ``++std::ranges::views::as_rvalue++``, it is now possible to make `s` an rvalue too, making the intent of the code clearer.

Reviewer: I think that with the current text, the exact benefits of `as_const` are unclear, because the issue is separated from its solution.

```suggestion
Writing ``++for (Shape& s : std::move(shapes))++`` would not fix the issue because this call to `std::move` has no effect here.
The call to `std::move` has to be on `s`, not `shapes`.

Notice that in this solution, the for-loop variable `s` remains an lvalue reference with a single `&`. In {cpp}23, it is possible to make it a rvalue too, with ``++std::ranges::views::as_rvalue++``, making the intent of the code clearer.
```

// We do not use the shorter form std::views::as_rvalue because libstdc++ does not support it yet.

[source,cpp]
----
void DrawingStore::insertAllVisibleShapes(std::vector<Shape>&& shapes) {

>   for (auto&& s : shapes | std::ranges::views::as_rvalue) {

Author: ```suggestion
  for (Shape&& s : shapes | std::ranges::views::as_rvalue) {
```

    if (s.isVisible()) {

>       store.emplace_back(std::move(s)); // Compliant

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      store.emplace_back(s); // Compliant
```
Or did I miss something?

Author: The rvalue `s` would not be moved. :-)

Reviewer: Oops... Still not used to `as_rvalue`...

    }
  }
}
----

=== How to move elements of a container using algorithms

Algorithms, especially with {cpp}20 ranges, are often better alternatives to manual for-loops since they abstract away a lot of implementation details.
However, not all of them abstract away the move semantics and attention is required to use them correctly.

==== Noncompliant code example

For example, `std::ranges::copy` performs copies by default:

[source,cpp,diff-id=3,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
void DrawingStore::insertAllShapes(std::vector<Shape>&& shapes) {
  // Noncompliant: the elements of shapes are not moved.
  std::ranges::copy(shapes, std::back_inserter(store));
}
----

==== Compliant solution

Here, the solution is fairly simple: `std::ranges::copy` can be replaced with `std::ranges::move`.

[source,cpp,diff-id=3,diff-type=compliant]
----
void DrawingStore::insertAllShapes(std::vector<Shape>&& shapes) {

>   // Compliant: use "move" instead of "copy".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // Compliant: uses "move" instead of "copy".
```

  std::ranges::move(shapes, std::back_inserter(store));
}
----

==== Noncompliant code example

> However, sometimes `std::ranges::move` cannot be used, for example when the transfer of container should be conditional.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, sometimes `std::ranges::move` cannot be used, for example when not all elements should be moved.
```

In this case, `std::ranges::copy_if` looks appropriate but falls short:

[source,cpp,diff-id=4,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
void DrawingStore::insertAllVisibleShapes(std::vector<Shape>&& shapes) {
  // Noncompliant: the elements of shapes are not moved.
  std::ranges::copy_if(
    shapes,
    std::back_inserter(store),
    &Shape::isVisible
  );
}
----

> Again, the elements are copies instead of moved.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Again, the elements are copied instead of being moved.
```

==== Compliant solution

> While a solution using {cpp}20 exists, it is fairly verbose and error-prone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While a solution using {cpp}20 exists, based on `std::make_move_iterator`, it is fairly verbose and error-prone.
```
Without giving too many details, help user search for the right terms.

Author: Makes sense. Slight adaptation:
```suggestion
While a solution based on ``++std::make_move_iterator++`` exists before {cpp}23, it is fairly verbose and error-prone.
```
I'm still not adding the link at the end in "Resources" though.

};
----

> Alternatively, `insertAllVisibleShapes` could also be rewritten like this using {cpp}23:

Author: I'm not sure I follow, there is already one above. Did you mean something else?

> Alternatively, `insertAllVisibleShapes` could also be rewritten like this using {cpp}23:

Author: @loic-joly-sonarsource ping

> Alternatively, `insertAllVisibleShapes` could also be rewritten like this using {cpp}23:

Author: @loic-joly-sonarsource I would say, if you have small suggestions, please share them. If you are not convinced with the approach or have larger suggestions, I'd rather not spend too much time on it and revert to the previous version for now. It can be improved later.
